---
layout: post
title: Unsorted recommended reading
comments: true
tags: books, motivation, complexity, growth, explanation, predictive-brain, network-theory
---

### Unsorted recommended reading

__Keywords__: books, motivation, complexity, growth, explanation, predictive brain, network theory

> Just a quick dump of thoughts I can refer to and reduce repetition in
> conversation. The books: **Scale**, **EoA**, **Pib**.

Sometime by the end of 2017 I picked up a tweet pushing Geoffrey
West's 2017 book: **Scale** - the universal laws of life and death in
organisms, cities, and companies. This immediately rang with me by
promising hot food regarding complexity, long-tailed distributions,
failure and growth. By that time I was already hyper-alert about
growth and pieces of growth related theory, based on its role in
development and learning (Refs: Pask, 1959, Physical analogues to the
growth of a concept). Current working hypothesis is, that **open-ended
learning processes** can be seen as **growth processes**. A theory of
growth should allow predictions about the preconditions, expected
learning speed, expected learning time and upper bounds of
learning. This is of course highly relevant when building curious,
self-aware, exploration agents and robots. Overt physical growth
appears to occur in the three-dimensional space of intuitive
experience. Alas, intuitive experience is itself an emergent
phenomenon of accumulated growth, and thus is probably significantly
mistaken about the character of the natural information space of any
given instance of a growth process. Many of you will recognize this as
another way of stating the *manifold hypothesis*. In summary, this
allows to model learning as the growth of explanation, obtained
through the accumulated information "precipitating" from an active
search process (aka stochastic optimization). Growth is provided
energy in terms of different resources from an underlying
implementation fabric (power, memory, time constraints); it is driven
by a need of explanation of experience, sufficient with respect to a
given motivation; implemented by equating explanation of experience
with actions, and by observing their adequacy; adequacy is estimated
via different exploration stratgies; finally growth is limited by
finite time horizons, uncertainty, inherent total complexity, and
again, resources. The explanation-action equality is one of several
useful consequences of the predictive brain hypothesis.

The book has a lot of fundamentals, examples, and pointers to more
detailed material on all of this. Main research questions I'm taking
home from the angle of developmental learning and robots are: how can
the properties of space-filling-ness and impedance be brought to work
on information flow in dynamic inferential circuits (aka adaptive
models); and what is the relation of these properties to modularity in
model space. Obviously module types and available sizes should support
impedance matching, coverage, learning speed, and scaling, besides
reuse.

Apart from this specific research perspective, on the basis of my
individual knowledge the book was smooth to read, and provided a huge
amount of highly informative reaffirmations, additional perspectives
and entirely novel concepts with immediate practical applicability in
everyday social, ecological, and ultimately psychological questions,
e.g. urban life, mass phenomena, one's own resources, teams and
management, communication and marketing, attention, information
spread, opinions, and so on, scaling.

Very happy having finally ingested a long time resident of my to-read
stack, Georg Franck, 1998, Die **Ökonomie der Aufmerksamkeit**,
Hanser, originally recommended to me by Otto Rössler in 2012. The book
seems to be available only in German on paper, but googling the ad-hoc
translation of the title should reveal a few english language
articles, which are much more compact than the book, so you're
lucky. Interestingly, the meaning of the German "Aufmerksamkeit" has
no direct correspondence in English and falls apart into the two
distinct terms of attention and awareness. Attention emphasizes the
outward direction and the objects of the process, while awareness
encodes the inward direction and the subject of the process.

Franck is a rare proponent of the radical privateness assumption about
subjective experience, probably necessary for effective self-models
and theories of mind in embodied agents and real world robots. This is
based on an extended version of Leibniz's monads and implies, that
there is no way in principle for any agent to obtain the ground truth
about any other agent's experience, ever. All information about the
experience of another has to be channelled through behaviour.

After getting attuned to the idiosyncracies, the book really takes off
and turns out to be written in beautifully precise and funny German
prose, imho. Again for me, it provided two essential assets to take
immediately. The first one is a thourough and explicit analysis of the
flow of attention in agent interaction, creating a powerful
explanation that simplifies several classically disparate phenomena by
the unifying them in a single framework by leveraging economical
methods of the analysis of behaviour. A welcome side effect of this is
a reference refutation of rational agents in classical game theory and
mainstream economic theory, that continues to fail so superbly over
the consequences of ignoring issues of the rational agent
assumption. Rationality can only be optimal in bounded linear
domains. In all others, where observability, dimensionality and
non-linearity combine to set a bound on the principal predictability,
irrational moves, more often called randomness, are more often than
not beneficial the agent's long-term well-being. For in-depth
disussions of the limits of naive application of the optimality
principle, see for example Loeb, 2012, Optimal isn't good enough;
Iigaya et al, 2017, Learning fast and slow: deviations from the
matching law can reflect an optimal strategy under uncertainty; tbc.

A lot of practical advice, guidance and inspiration can be found on
the tactical and strategic level valid in almost all domains requiring
systematic communication on any level. In particular, it includes an
analysis of the self-referential level of motivation and
self-storytelling, and extends upwards to all levels of social
relationships from dyadic, families, extended families, teams, teams
of teams, to supercritical phenomena like mass media and large scale
social networks.

A recurring example and workhorse for the theory is the science it
self. I would expect that anyone involved with science and its
orthodox implementations on a professional level will shop one or more
insights into the processes of the science market, allowing new kinds
of power moves. Or so. Anyway, need to run, tbc.

...

### Comments

{% if page.comments %}
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>

/**
*  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
*  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables*/
/*
var disqus_config = function () {
this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
};
*/
(function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
s.src = '//x75.disqus.com/embed.js';
s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
(d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
})();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}

### Footnotes

<sup><a id="fn.1" href="#fnr.1">1</a></sup>fn.1
