---
layout: post
title: dynatropes
comments: true
tags: definitions motion robotics principles research philosophy organization-of-behavior smp jcl gt
---

### dynatropes

What is a dynatrope and do we need this word?

tl;dr Like plants are things that move towards more light, dynatropes
are things that move towards more options. A dynatropism is a motion
towards regions in space that provide more possibilities for different
actions. A dynatrope is a thing performing this motion.

### context

An open question in robotics research is how does autonomous
development work? The type of thing we are going through, starting
with the egg cell, over fetus, infant, teenager to adult and then
onwards. The learning going on during all that time is immense and
intricately staged. We want to understand how this works and build our
machines in a similar way.

A good part of it can be accounted for with goals, how to choose goals
when no one provides them to you, how to tell good goals from the
too-easy or too-hard ones, when to persist and when to give up. This
goal juggling is the motivation. Many interesting models have been
proposed for motivation systems [citation needed]. One of them is
called intrinsic motivation, another one the Polyani-Salge empowerment
[citation needed,1,3].

Empowerment provides a measuring stick for the amount of empowerment
available in different regions of space. Now a map of the space can be
built visiting random places and taking a measure at each place. The
things that perform directed motion in this space using the map can now be
called empowerment maximizing agents or intrinsically motivated
agents. The names are correct but bulky and awkward.

### definition

Dynatropism. from greek dynamis (power)[4] and tropos (a
turning)[5]. Drive to option, Streben nach Möglichkeit, Streben nach
kraft, Polyani-Salge empowerment.

The dyna- part indicates power as the characteristic sensorimotor
modality. The -tropos bit means 'directed motion towards' by the
ability to turn into any direction at all.

Things that are controlled by a dynatropism are dynatropes.

### notes and refs

This type of naming is compatible with the biological naming system
(taxonomy)[5]. There is a precedent of using it in robotics by BEAM [0]
approach.

[0] <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BEAM_robotics>

[1] Polyani-Salge empowerment is a concept from developmental learning research, related concepts are autonomous learning, lifelong learning, intrinsic motivation, artificial motivation, adaptive systems, complex adaptive systems, homeokinesis, predictive infomax, guided self-organization, etc. v/ interesting topic, recommended way for burning idle cycles.

[3] The everyday language meaning of empowerment corresponds quite well with whats made more precise in the mathematical model.

[4] <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamics>

[5] <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropism>

### tropisms basics

When things are moving around in space in any kind of way that's
motion. When things move around in a directed way thats a tropic
motion. Tropic motion is generated by a tropism, a biological control
system.

In perception the different channels like ears, eyes, noses, feet, and
so on are called sensory modalities. Sensory modality can be used to
put tropisms into different groups and then look at what is shared
among all tropisms and what is unique to particular tropisms.

There is a lot of cool words for many kinds of modalities. These words
are chosen to indicate the physical phenomenon that is the basis for
the biochemical reactions of biological receptors, like a hair cell in
the inner ear, or a photo cell on the retina. Gah, spilled it, so
photo means light, chemo means molecules, hydro means water, electro
means electro, everything else needs to be looked up on Wikipedia.

Now we can build a phototropism, understand that this is something
that looks where the light is coming from and directs the motion of
another thing doing the actual moving around. That thing is called a
phototrope. Chemotropes are things that move towards or away from
particular molecules. Most plants are phototropes, animals are
chemotropes, people too.

### Comments

{% if page.comments %}
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>

/**
*  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
*  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables*/
/*
var disqus_config = function () {
this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
};
*/
(function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
s.src = '//x75.disqus.com/embed.js';
s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
(d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
})();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}

