---
layout: post
title: autoedit
author: Oswald Berthold
date: 2021-02-17
comments: true
tags: audio tools
---

> autoedit is a Python audio tool that creates automagic edits of
> too-long or too-short audio files. Randomly, no repeat. Generate and
> test. Good news is, they always sound good. How? With big use of
> small AI. Now available as web app, no install required.

### tl;dr autoedit

autoedit is a tool that creates an *edit* from your input file. Edit
means, the input file is broken into chunks and then some chunks are
chosen and arranged in some order to make the output file.

### Quick start

Go to to <https://api.jetpack.cl>

First time round enter your api key. Be in touch to get a key.

On the the site you will find four red tabs, Drop, Files, Actions,
Tasks. Upload some files via the drop tab, either from your hard disk
or from the internet via a Youtube or similar URL.

Go to the file tab to make sure your files are there.

Go to the Actions tab and select autoedit. In the autoedit
configuration form, add an input file, set the duration to something
small, 30 - 60 seconds. Set the assembly mode to random. Set the
number of segments (numsegs) to something between 20 and 200.

Click start. Wait a bit and download the .wav result and ignore the
other outputs. Don't like it, rerun it, like it. Generate and test.

### Why autoedit?

A lot more music is created every day than is actually published.

To some extent that is about the confidence that people have about the
relevance of the music they make in their own sociocultural
island. They play it safe and say, I'm just making this for my own
pleasure. Granted.

Even for music producers that would describe themselves as such, and
who have previously published music to critical acclaim, a large
proportion of what is created remains dark in private storage and is
not published, for a number of reasons.

One of these reasons is the effort of going the last mile, so to say,
the effort to take a raw piece of music with some good bits in it,
like a session recording, and from that make refined and publishable
form. The reluctance to do so is understandable because it can become
a lot of effort, even just screening the footage to get an overview of
what is in there in a longer session.

What then, if this part of the production/publication cycle could be
automated? Would we hear even more cool music than we do already
because just more of what is made is actually published?

### Why autoedit? II

In many areas of professional and recreational activity, you find
yourself in front of long media files, often recordings of some
session or event. Common to all these cases is the wish to shorten
these files for publishing and easier consumption. Shortening means to
cut the original recording into slices, leaving some or most of them
out and picking a few to remain in the resulting shortened version.

Most often again, there is parts which do not contain any relevant
information. While there is other parts where a lot of relevant
information is packed into a small amount of time (think for example
biomonitoring and wildlife recordings).

In all of these cases, the transition from one part to the next is
marked by an onset of something new, which hasn't been there
before. If you automagically slice the original recording into chunks
on each of these onsets, then select the relevant chunks, and glue
them back together to form an output, that would help a lot. Example
areas where this is the daily business is music production,
publishing, event organization, or journalism.

Turns out that can be done.

### How does it work?

TODO

### What is autoedit?

Autoedit was invented collectively observing a session based
production workflow. Visiting friends in the stu on a regular basis,
we observed that capture (recording the stuff) was being handled, yet
consolidating or even publishing it was not.

A lot of thinking ticks later, we arrived at a workable proposition
consisting of a collection of Python scripts that do the job. A couple
of run-ins with potential users and going through their individual
installation processes told us to create a web app and provide
autoedit in style of Software-as-a-Service (SaaS).

If you're in a hurry, enter <https://api.jetpack.cl>

### Questions

> what happens if you tell autoedit to create a track longer than what
> you give it? does it just repeat segments?

yes

> how do i credit droptrack on my release?

please use

"Sensorimotor Primitives Auditory Perception Software by Jetpack Cognition Lab"

### Design philosophy

What we are talking about is music cognition and what we use to create
that is a set of libraries from the Music Information Retrieval (MIR)
community [1]. There exists significant amount of music cognition
ability in these libraries.

We set out to create a segmentation of the input file into a set of
different parts. Part in the sense of where you and I would agree that
these do constitute different parts of any given piece of audio
recording. Twenty seconds of the main voice active, 40 seconds of no
bass drum, 12 seconds of a single voice. That kinda stuff, mute on /
off on the desk. In addition we want the large scale segmentation to
be aligned on the beat grid, if the audio has a beat (every audio has
some degree of beat but don't tell anyone, else confusion and cost
rained down on us).

Now there is some realization from that we can put into action:

1/ combine the functionally overlapping feature detectors of different
MIR libraries to obtain an improved result

2/ use philosophy to utilize **onset** type features on two different
time scales

3/ combine two time scales to make beat aligned segment boundary
inferences

4/ use random strategies, they are cheap and always worth it. 

> (Idea can be extended to other domains, that's another post).



### Footnotes

[1] ISMIR Community, TODO insert link

### Comments

{% if page.comments %}
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>

/**
*  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
*  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables*/
/*
var disqus_config = function () {
this.page.url = PAGE_URL;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
this.page.identifier = PAGE_IDENTIFIER; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
};
*/
(function() { // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
s.src = '//x75.disqus.com/embed.js';
s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
(d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
})();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}

